docs/sources/alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule.md, before:

---
aliases:
  - ../unified-alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule/ # /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule/
  - ../unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-cortex-loki-namespace-group/ # /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-cortex-loki-namespace-group/
  - ../unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-mimir-loki-namespace-group/ # /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-mimir-loki-namespace-group/
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule/
description: Configure data source-managed alert rules alert for an external Grafana Mimir or Loki instance
keywords:
  - grafana
  - alerting
  - guide
  - rules
  - create
labels:
  products:
    - cloud
    - enterprise
    - oss
title: Configure data source-managed alert rules
weight: 200
refs:
  alerting:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/alerting/
  annotation-label:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/fundamentals/alert-rules/annotation-label/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/alerting/fundamentals/alert-rules/annotation-label/
  alert-list:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/panels-visualizations/visualizations/alert-list/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/visualizations/panels-visualizations/visualizations/alert-list/
  time-series:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/panels-visualizations/visualizations/time-series/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/visualizations/panels-visualizations/visualizations/time-series/
---

# Configure data source-managed alert rules

Create data source-managed alert rules for Grafana Mimir or Grafana Loki data sources, which have been configured to support rule creation.

To configure your Grafana Mimir or Loki data source for alert rule creation, enable either the Loki Ruler API or the Mimir Ruler API.

For more information, refer to [Loki Ruler API](/docs/loki/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/api/#ruler) or [Mimir Ruler API](/docs/mimir/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/references/http-api/#ruler).

**Note**:

Alert rules for a Grafana Mimir or Loki instance can be edited or deleted by users with Editor or Admin roles.

If you delete an alerting resource created in the UI, you can no longer retrieve it.
To make a backup of your configuration and to be able to restore deleted alerting resources, create your alerting resources using file provisioning, Terraform, or the Alerting API.

## Before you begin

- Verify that you have write permission to the Mimir or Loki data source. Otherwise, you cannot create or update Grafana Mimir or Loki-managed alert rules.

- Enable the Mimir or Loki Ruler API.

  - **Loki** - The `local` rule storage type, default for the Loki data source, supports only viewing of rules. To edit rules, configure one of the other rule storage types.

  - **Grafana Mimir** - use the `/prometheus` prefix. The Prometheus data source supports both Grafana Mimir and Prometheus, and Grafana expects that both the [Query API](/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#querier--query-frontend) and [Ruler API](/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#ruler) are under the same URL. You cannot provide a separate URL for the Ruler API.

Watch this video to learn more about how to create a Mimir-managed alert rule: {{< vimeo 720001865 >}}

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
If you do not want to manage alert rules for a particular Loki or Mimir data source, go to its settings and clear the **Manage alerts via Alerting UI** checkbox.
{{% /admonition %}}

To create a data source-managed alert rule, use the in-product alert creation flow and follow these steps to help you.

## Set alert rule name

1. Click **Alerts & IRM** -> **Alert rules** -> **+ New alert rule**.
1. Enter a name to identify your alert rule.

   This name is displayed in the alert rule list. It is also the `alertname` label for every alert instance that is created from this rule.

## Define query and condition

Define a query to get the data you want to measure and a condition that needs to be met before an alert rule fires.

**Note**:

All alert rules are managed by Grafana by default. To switch to a data source-managed alert rule, click **Switch to data source-managed alert rule**.

1. Select a data source from the drop-down list.

   You can also click **Open advanced data source picker** to see more options, including adding a data source (Admins only).

1. Enter a PromQL or LogQL query.
1. Click **Preview alerts**.

## Set alert evaluation behavior

Use alert rule evaluation to determine how frequently an alert rule should be evaluated and how quickly it should change its state.

1. Select a namespace or click **+ New namespace**.
1. Select an evaluation group or click **+ New evaluation group**.

   If you are creating a new evaluation group, specify the interval for the group.

   All rules within the same group are evaluated sequentially over the same time interval.

1. Enter a pending period.

   The pending period is the period in which an alert rule can be in breach of the condition until it fires.

   Once a condition is met, the alert goes into the **Pending** state. If the condition remains active for the duration specified, the alert transitions to the **Firing** state, else it reverts to the **Normal** state.

## Configure notifications

Add labels to your alert rules to set which notification policy should handle your firing alert instances.

All alert rules and instances, irrespective of their labels, match the default notification policy. If there are no nested policies, or no nested policies match the labels in the alert rule or alert instance, then the default notification policy is the matching policy.

1. Add labels if you want to change the way your notifications are routed.

   Add custom labels by selecting existing key-value pairs from the drop down, or add new labels by entering the new key or value.

## Add annotations

Add [annotations](ref:annotation-label). to provide more context on the alert in your alert notifications.

Annotations add metadata to provide more information on the alert in your alert notifications. For example, add a **Summary** annotation to tell you which value caused the alert to fire or which server it happened on.

1. Optional: Add a summary.

   Short summary of what happened and why.

1. Optional: Add a description.

   Description of what the alert rule does.

1. Optional: Add a Runbook URL.

   Webpage where you keep your runbook for the alert

1. Optional: Add a custom annotation
1. Optional: Add a **dashboard and panel link**.

   Links alerts to panels in a dashboard.

   {{% admonition type="note" %}}
   At the moment, alert rules are only supported in [time series](ref:time-series) and [alert list](ref:alert-list) visualizations.
   {{% /admonition %}}

1. Click **Save rule**.

Commit message:

Alerting docs: Update `Create alert rules from panels`

docs/sources/alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule.md, after:

---
aliases:
  - ../unified-alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule/ # /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule/
  - ../unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-cortex-loki-namespace-group/ # /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-cortex-loki-namespace-group/
  - ../unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-mimir-loki-namespace-group/ # /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/unified-alerting/alerting-rules/edit-mimir-loki-namespace-group/
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/alerting-rules/create-mimir-loki-managed-rule/
description: Configure data source-managed alert rules alert for an external Grafana Mimir or Loki instance
keywords:
  - grafana
  - alerting
  - guide
  - rules
  - create
labels:
  products:
    - cloud
    - enterprise
    - oss
title: Configure data source-managed alert rules
weight: 200
refs:
  alerting:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/alerting/
  annotation-label:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/fundamentals/alert-rules/annotation-label/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/alerting/fundamentals/alert-rules/annotation-label/
  link-alert-rules-to-dashboards:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/alerting-rules/link-alert-rules-to-dashboards/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/alerting/alerting-rules/link-alert-rules-to-dashboards/
---

# Configure data source-managed alert rules

Create data source-managed alert rules for Grafana Mimir or Grafana Loki data sources, which have been configured to support rule creation.

To configure your Grafana Mimir or Loki data source for alert rule creation, enable either the Loki Ruler API or the Mimir Ruler API.

For more information, refer to [Loki Ruler API](/docs/loki/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/api/#ruler) or [Mimir Ruler API](/docs/mimir/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/references/http-api/#ruler).

**Note**:

Alert rules for a Grafana Mimir or Loki instance can be edited or deleted by users with Editor or Admin roles.

If you delete an alerting resource created in the UI, you can no longer retrieve it.
To make a backup of your configuration and to be able to restore deleted alerting resources, create your alerting resources using file provisioning, Terraform, or the Alerting API.

## Before you begin

- Verify that you have write permission to the Mimir or Loki data source. Otherwise, you cannot create or update Grafana Mimir or Loki-managed alert rules.

- Enable the Mimir or Loki Ruler API.

  - **Loki** - The `local` rule storage type, default for the Loki data source, supports only viewing of rules. To edit rules, configure one of the other rule storage types.

  - **Grafana Mimir** - use the `/prometheus` prefix. The Prometheus data source supports both Grafana Mimir and Prometheus, and Grafana expects that both the [Query API](/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#querier--query-frontend) and [Ruler API](/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/reference-http-api/#ruler) are under the same URL. You cannot provide a separate URL for the Ruler API.

Watch this video to learn more about how to create a Mimir-managed alert rule: {{< vimeo 720001865 >}}

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
If you do not want to manage alert rules for a particular Loki or Mimir data source, go to its settings and clear the **Manage alerts via Alerting UI** checkbox.
{{% /admonition %}}

To create a data source-managed alert rule, use the in-product alert creation flow and follow these steps to help you.

## Set alert rule name

1. Click **Alerts & IRM** -> **Alert rules** -> **+ New alert rule**.
1. Enter a name to identify your alert rule.

   This name is displayed in the alert rule list. It is also the `alertname` label for every alert instance that is created from this rule.

## Define query and condition

Define a query to get the data you want to measure and a condition that needs to be met before an alert rule fires.

**Note**:

All alert rules are managed by Grafana by default. To switch to a data source-managed alert rule, click **Switch to data source-managed alert rule**.

1. Select a data source from the drop-down list.

   You can also click **Open advanced data source picker** to see more options, including adding a data source (Admins only).

1. Enter a PromQL or LogQL query.
1. Click **Preview alerts**.

## Set alert evaluation behavior

Use alert rule evaluation to determine how frequently an alert rule should be evaluated and how quickly it should change its state.

1. Select a namespace or click **+ New namespace**.
1. Select an evaluation group or click **+ New evaluation group**.

   If you are creating a new evaluation group, specify the interval for the group.

   All rules within the same group are evaluated sequentially over the same time interval.

1. Enter a pending period.

   The pending period is the period in which an alert rule can be in breach of the condition until it fires.

   Once a condition is met, the alert goes into the **Pending** state. If the condition remains active for the duration specified, the alert transitions to the **Firing** state, else it reverts to the **Normal** state.

## Configure notifications

Add labels to your alert rules to set which notification policy should handle your firing alert instances.

All alert rules and instances, irrespective of their labels, match the default notification policy. If there are no nested policies, or no nested policies match the labels in the alert rule or alert instance, then the default notification policy is the matching policy.

1. Add labels if you want to change the way your notifications are routed.

   Add custom labels by selecting existing key-value pairs from the drop down, or add new labels by entering the new key or value.

## Add annotations

Add [annotations](ref:annotation-label). to provide more context on the alert in your alert notifications.

Annotations add metadata to provide more information on the alert in your alert notifications. For example, add a **Summary** annotation to tell you which value caused the alert to fire or which server it happened on.

1. Optional: Add a summary.

   Short summary of what happened and why.

1. Optional: Add a description.

   Description of what the alert rule does.

1. Optional: Add a Runbook URL.

   Webpage where you keep your runbook for the alert

1. Optional: Add a custom annotation
1. Optional: Add a **dashboard and panel link**.

   [Link the alert rule to a panel in a dashboard](ref:link-alert-rules-to-dashboards).

1. Click **Save rule**.
